We now look at another data structure called
a Search Tree.
So, to motivate search trees let us consider
the following example.
So, supposing you are an air traffic controller
and you controlling access to a single run
way, flights have to land and takeoff.
So, the air traffic control tower receives
request from the air craft about the expected
arrival and departure times and these request
come at random time.
So, it is not that they come in order of the
time of the actual event.
So, we might first get a request for a landing
in Chennai at 16:23 and later on we might
get a request for a takeoff at 16:12 which
is actually earlier.
And then, we might get another arrival information
at 16:55, then other earlier arrival information
at 16:18 and the strategy with the control
tower is supposed to follow is to give priority
to the flight with the earliest usage time.
So, this is a priority queue, each request
goes into the queue, but it has a priority
depending on the expected time that it is
going to take place.
So, we could give a min heap representation
and if you take the 6 request in the order
that they come we insert them into the min
heap, then we will get the min heap that we
see on the right hand side.
And so in this, because 16:12 happens to be
the earliest event among these 6, it will
automatically float up to the route and so
it will be available to us is the next event
to the process and then maybe 2 minutes before
that event may happens, we get send signal
to the flight giving a clearance to take off.
So, suppose we have an extra requirement on
this, not only do we have to want to give
priority to the earliest event to happen,
but we also want to impose some minimum separation
of planes to avoid any possibility of collisions
on the run way.
So, we say that 2 planes accessing the run
way must be a minimum of 3 minutes apart.
Now, in this example we can see that the rule
is violated by the 2 events at 16:53 and 16:55.
So, what happens is that we should when we
insert or we accept the request for 16:55
assuming it came after 16:53.
At this point, we should check that whether
it is at least 3 minutes apart from all the
current pending request, if not we should
send a message to the pilot saying 16:55 is
not possible, you must move your takeoff or
landing to 16:56 or later.
Now, unfortunately in the heap data structure
there is no easy way to do this.
So, when 16:55 is added to the heap, we have
to scan it against all the elements in the
heap in order to find out whether it is within
3 minutes or any of them.
So, this would be a linear scan, so all other
operations insert and delete on a heap for
logarithmic.
But, this if you want to impose this constraint
that no two elements in the heap of within
3 minutes of each other, then we would add
an extra linear time cost to every insert
and this would then make a heap unviable for
this kind of data.
So, one way to compute this kind of requirement
is to be able to check the predecessor and
the successor.
In other words, given the list of value set
we have for any value can we quickly compute
what is the previous in terms of the nearest
a smaller value and then next successor what
is the nearest bigger value.
So, if you look at 16:18 for example, then
the next smaller value is here, so this is
the predecessor 16:12 and the next bigger
value is here, so this is the successor.
Now, this happens to be it looks like there
is some nice relationship within the heap
in terms of the tree structure between predecessor
and successor.
But, if you look at a different value for
example, 16:53 then we will find that the
predecessor lies in a different branch of
the tree and the successor lies in the same
branch.
So, there is no direct relationship between
the tree structure of the heap and the predecessor
and the successor relation that we need.
However, the important thing to notice if
we could compute predecessor and successor,
then we can solve this problem.
Because, once we look at the successor or
the predecessor and we find something which
is within 3 minutes, then we can fix, flag
the warning and signal to that aircraft that
request is not tenable.
So, if you want to maintain this information,
let us try and look at the different data
structures we have seen, so far.
So, we have unsorted array, sorted arrays
and min heaps, now in this particular structure
we are not going to look at directly a delete
min or a delete max.
But, two separate operations one which checks
the minimum and maximum and one which deletes
an element arbitrarily.
So, for min and max as far as min and max
go, then it is clear that the best data structure
is sorted array, because these values are
at the extreme ends of the array.
The worst is an unsorted array, because it
will be anywhere and both require linear time
and then depending on whether we have a min
heap or the max heap, one of them is good
and the other one is bad.
So, in a min heap we can find the minimum
with the root, the maximum could be anywhere
and likewise in a max heap a maximum would
be at the root, minimum could be anywhere.
So, if you look at the next set of operations,
this is insert and delete, now here it turns
out that an unsorted array is good for insert,
because, we can just stick it at the end.
For delete, we have to go through the array
and look for the value and remove it, so it
will take linear time.
In a sorted array both will be slow, because
we have to either insert in the correct position,
like in insertion sort or when we delete we
have to compress the array which will take
linear time.
Now, we know that in a min heap insert is
logarithmic, delete is also logarithmic even
though this is not delete min.
So, this can be broken up as two steps, so
update to the current minimum overall minus
1 and then delete min.
So, you can take the current value that you
want to delete, reset it is value, so that
it becomes the minimum, in which case as we
saw when you update to a smaller value, it
will propagate up to the root.
And then, if you delete min that value is
disappear and so we would effectively in two
steps of log n each we would deleted it, so
overall it is log n.
And now as we just said predecessor and successor
in a sorted list they are adjacent, so these
are both constant operations.
On the other hand, in an unsorted list we
have to look through the whole array and we
also said in a heap, we have to scan.
Because, there is no particular order in which
the adjacent elements are stored in the heap.
So, what we are going to look at today and
binary search trees and in a binary search
tree we are going to argue that all of these
operations are actually logarithmic, provided
we maintain the binary search tree with a
good structure.
And also we will look at an operation called
find, which searches for a value and this
will also be logarithmic.
So, we will simultaneously be able to optimize,
all these 7 operations in a binary search
tree.
So, a binary tree is just a tree with a root
in which every node has either 1, 2 or 3 children,
the heap poses a very special kind of binary
tree, which we filled up top to bottom left
to right, but in general a binary tree has
no constraint.
So, we have values at each node and we will
assume that not only do we have way to go
from the parent to the child, but we also
have a way to go from the child to the parent.
So, every node we are going to assume will
have a link to it is parent, left child and
right child of course, these links maybe missing,
but if they are there then they all three.
So, we will can point up the tree and to the
two nodes below it or down the tree.
So, just in terms of terminology the root
is the top most node, it has no parent, the
leaf is any node which has no children and
at any given point, if you look at a node,
then it is a parent of it is left child and
it is right child.
So, now we take a binary tree and we further
impose a constraint of the values.
So, remember like in a heap we first at as
structural condition that at a tree is filled
top to bottom left to right and then we said,
there is a heap property which says max heap
or min heap, either a node is bigger than
its 2 children or its smaller than its 2 children.
So, they we have a property on the structure
and they was a property on the value, so how
they are arrange with this respect to each
other.
So, in a binary search tree, the binary tree
could have an arbitrary structure that the
values are arranged in a specific way.
So, for each node with a value v, all the
nodes below v, smaller than v are in the left
sub tree and all the values bigger than v
are in the rights sub tree.
And we typically we will assume that there
are no duplicate values.
So, for example, here if you look at a root
node 5, then the left sub tree of 5 contains
values 1, 2, 4 which are all the nodes in
these tree smaller than 5.
And the right sub tree contains 8 and 9, now
this is the property that is recursively satisfied
throughout the tree.
So, if you look at the node 2 for example,
it is left child, left sub trees just a single
node 1 which is value smaller than in the
tree rooted at 2 and it is right sub trees
the value 4 which is the right it is a bigger
than 2, the only value bigger than 2 this
sub tree.
Likewise, if you look at 8 in this only one
value other than 8 in the sub tree starting
at 8 has the value 9 and since it is we go
in the right sub tree and we have the left
sub tree empty.
So, we can have this kind of gaps unlike in
heaps, we can have a gap, but we have this
uniform property that at any node in the sub
tree all the value smaller than the node are
on the left, and all the values bigger are
on the right.
So, typically we would implement this as a
link structure, where we have each node with
3 fields other than the value.
So, we have a pointed to the parent, a pointed
to the left child and a pointed to the right
child.
So, the first thing that we can do with a
binary search tree is to list out its values
in sorted order, this is called a in order
traversal.
So, in order traversal is recursive traversal
it is a way of walking through the tree.
So, that we first walk through the left sub
tree, then the current node and then the right
sub tree.
For example, if you perform a in order traversal
here, we start at the root and then we have
to first walk on the lefts up tree, so we
walk to the left child.
And then, once again we must walk on to the
left of tree, so you walk to the left child.
And now, there are no left child, so now we
will print out 1.
And move backup, because is no right child,
now we print out 2.
And go down to the right sub tree and now
again because 4 has no left or right sub tree,
so will print out and go backup.
And since we already finish to we will end
of that the root.
Have we will print 5 move to the sub tree,
then because there is no left sub tree will
print 8 and go to the right sub tree.
And finally, will print 9.
So, it easy to see the because of this property,
we know that everything to the left is smaller
than that value and everything to the right
is bigger than the value.
So, this is like a recursive, in this is very
similar to the partitioning of quick sort
in a sense.
So, we have already partition the values of
the smaller values are to the left.
So, there are bigger values to the right and
if you recursively follow this partitioning
to list out we will; obviously, get the values
in sorted order.
So, now searching for a tree a value in a
binary search tree is very much like binary
search.
Remember, in binary search you have an array
and then we start at the midpoint and then
if you find it you say yes; otherwise, if
it is smaller you go and to left; otherwise,
one is bigger we look at the right.
So, we have a very similar thing, so we want
to find a value v in a tree, if the tree is
empty of course, we say that is not there,
so we return false.
If the current node has the value, then we
have found it and return 2, on the other hand
if have you not founded it, then since we
have a tree we look to see whether the value
is smaller than the current value, it is smaller
than we recursively search in the left and
return whatever we find there .If it is found
there we say to true, it is not found there
which we say to the tree; otherwise, we search
recursively the right, so this is very similar
binary search.
Now, like binary search you can do iterative
version of this, so you start at the root
and then so long as it is not nil you trust
on the path.
So, the current value is v return true; otherwise,
you walked on to the left are you actually
start to the root and you kind of trace a
path you can values are that find.
And then when you reach a node you say yes,
on the other hand if you reach a point where
you cannot going further, if you run out of
nodes, if you come all the way down and then
you say there is no extension, where I can
find it then we will say false.
So, this is the simple recursive and iterative
version of find.
So, the next two operations insert we want
to do your finding the minimum and the maximum.
So, the minimum node in the tree is the left
most node, in other words it is the node that
you reach if you go and as for as you can
follow only left edges.
So, in this case from 5 for go left I go to
3, from 3 if I go to left I go to 1 and then
I cannot go left there is something below
one it is on the right, but never the less
in cannot go left one must be the minimum
element on the tree, because everything that
is smaller than something will be 2 is left,
so if I cannot go left is nothing smaller
than 1.
So, this is the reason why the left most value
in the tree will be the minimum.
So, we can easily find it recursively, now
we will typically use this assuming the trees
not empty, it simplifies a little bit of coding.
So, assuming the trees not empty we do not
have to check any special condition and given
a error when it is not empty, when it is empty.
So, we assume it is not empty, so if we can
go left we can we do, so if the t dot left
is nil then this is the minimum value and
we return otherwise, we recursively search
for the minimum value on the left.
And again there is the very simple iterative
version, we start with the current thing and
we keep going left as long as we can.
So, long as we do not it will nil and when
reach this point why t dot left is nil, we
come out with this loop and you return the
value at this point, so here from since we
would start with 5 t dot left is 3, t dot
left is 1, t dot left is nil.
So, this at this point we stop, so t is pointing
to 1, so therefore t dot value is 1 and this
is the value by return, so we can find the
minimum.
So, symmetrically the maximum is the right
most value on the tree, as you go right you
go bigger, if you cannot go right any more
this is nothing which is bigger than that
node.
So, here from 5 we can go to 7 to 9 and 9
is the biggest value, because a next node
which all though it is below 9 in the tree
it is through the left and therefore, smaller
than 9.
So, we have a symmetric recursive solution
maxval, we checks the right if the right is
nil then we are at the maximum we return the
value if the right is not nil, then we recursively
search the right for the maximum.
And again iterative version of the same, we
just follow chase point as to the right.
So, as long as right t dot right is not nil,
we move from t to t dot right and when we
cannot move any we are at the maximum value,
so we return that value.
So, this point we have done find minimum and
maximum in a search tree.
So, these three operations we have done, now
if you remember we have do predecessor and
successor.
So, let us first look at successor, so recall
that the successor of x in the list, supposed
to be the next value, the next smallest value
after x the list.
So, if we print it out in sorted order, it
will be the value that would appear to the
right of x and the in order traversal of a
tree prints out the values in sorted order.
So, it is effectively what in order would
print immediately after x.
So, we know that the way that in order works,
it prints the left sub tree then it prints
x, then it prints right sub tree.
So, if you want to one that comes immediately
after x, it will be the first value here.
So, the smallest value in the right sub tree,
in other words the minimum of the right sub
tree and we already know how to compute the
minimum of a tree, but they could be a possibility
that we want to successor of a value with
does not have a right sub tree, then what
we do.
So, the first observation is that if a value
has no right sub tree, then it must be the
maximum of the sub tree to which it belongs.
So, in this case we look at the value x, it
has no right sub trees, so it is the maximum
of some sub tree.
So, we have to first identify this sub tree,
so how do we identify the sub tree, will be
walk up and find out how this sub tree is
connected.
So, we get to x there following is sequence
of right pointers.
So, we follow those right pointers backwards
and when we a follow a left pointer, we know
that we have come out of this sub tree.
So, therefore that node must be the root of
the sub tree below is this is the left sub
tree, therefore that is the next value.
So, this entire red, block sub tree will be
printed out and sorted order ending with x,
after this the root will be printed thus which
is this node which we have label as successor.
So, therefore, that is the node that we want
took a designate in the success for x.
So, here is a simple pseudo code for this,
so we want to find the successor of node t.
Now, if this node has a right pointer, then
we just return the minimum value of the right
sub tree, on the other hand if it does not
have a right, then we need to go up and find
the first place where the path turns right.
So, we start with t and then we compute it
is parent which we call y now.
So, long as this direction is right, we keep
moving up's we go to one more parent and we
move t up, so that is what happening in this
loop here.
So, we move t and y up and then at some point
we have move t and y will go this way.
So, it will be y dot left and therefore, this
now this y is the successor of this original
node t and then there is one special case
where we have reach the top and we do not
ever turn right and that is case where we
as you as started from the maximum value overall
in the tree, in which case we reach in then
it has no successor of we will just return
nil.
So, let us look at this particular thing,
so for 3 for incidents the right sub tree
exists 4 and this smaller is value there is
4.
Therefore, there is a success of for 1 the
smallest values 2, so that is the successor
for 7 the minimum value in this sub tree is
8.
So, 8 is a successor or 7, so these all come
out of the basic case for you have a right
sub tree.
On the other hand, if you do not have a right
sub tree then for instance you started 2,
then you walk up and that they where you turn
right, you find that 3 is the successive or
from 4 you walk up and you very term right
you find that 5 is successive.
Similarly, for I 8 you immediately turn right,
so 9 is successive and finally, for 9 you
will come in and you will reach this nil case.
So, 9 will say that there is no successive,
because it is the large possible value.
So, the situation for the predecessor is symmetric,
so if we have a left sub tree, then the predecessor
is the maximum value in this.
So, we go down left and then we go all the
way right and if we do not have a left sub
tree, then it means that this is already the
minimum value in it is sub trees.
So, we walk back up following these sequence
of left pointers, until we turn the other
way and then this node we have turn is predecessors.
So, for example if you look at these values
which have left sub trees, so for 5 we go
down the left sub tree and we find the right
most value which is 4.
So, 4 is the predecessor are 5, likewise 2
is the predecessor of 3 and 8 is the predecessor
of 9, now we have this other value.
So, which we cannot to left for example, we
cannot go left it 2, we cannot go left it
4, we cannot go left it 7, cannot go left
it 8.
So, what do we do in these cases we started
2 for example, and then we try to go up and
where we turn right there we find.
So, we come here and we find that one is a
predecessor simulate from 4 if you go and
so we a goal is to go right and then where
we turn left if find predecessor.
So, immediately turn left of these three nodes
and then 8 we go right and where we turn left
we find the predecessor.
So, this is how the predecessor works it is
exactly symmetric to the successor function.
So, now let us see how to insert a value,
inserting a value in a search tree fairly
straight forward, there is only one place
because of remember that the tree is listed
in order will give us a shorted list.
So, now after adding this value it must second
give us a sorted list, so it is like saying
that they was only one place to insert a value
in a shorted list.
So, is like insertion in a shorted list, except
we have to find that correct place in the
tree to hang it.
So, that when we do this in order traversal,
it would be in the correct order when we list
it out.
And it turns out that basically we have to
find out where it should be by searching for
it and if it is not present, we add it by
this search fields.
So, for instance if you want to insert 21,
then we will walked down the tree and we will
look for the place where we should find 21.
So, it is smaller than 52 we go a left, smaller
than 37 we go a left, bigger than 16 we go
right and then we find that at 28 those no
value of 21, because there is no left, so
this since it should be to the left it 28,
we add it there.
Now, for instance if we want to insert 65,
then we will go right from 52 and now it is
74 we will look left, where they is nothing
to the left.
So, we will insert it there, so it can happen
at any position in the tree does not have
to be at a leaf node like a 28, 28 was already
a leaf and be inserted 21 below it.
But, 74 had a right child, but we inserted
something to it is left, because left child
Now, it could be that we said try to insert
a value that is already there, for instants
in my prompt to insert 91.
So, we look for 91 and we find it, so we will
interpret the insertion of 91 has something
which does not disturbed the tree, because
we earlier said we do not want to have duplicate
values.
So, when we insert we try to find if the fine
fields we insert, if find the succeeds we
do nothing.
So, this is very simple recursive way to do
this, so first of all we have a special case
which such as that trees empty, then we just
create a new node and point to that node.
So, this is an isolated node which has only
a value v parent left and right to the all
be nil, on the other hand if we find it, then
we do nothing, now we have not found it.
So, now if the values smaller then the value
if the current node and if we have no left
child, then we actually insert.
If we have to go left and we cannot go left,
then we create a new node to are left and
we make that node point here by it is parents.
So, we create a new node here and we say that
it is parent is ourselves.
So, t dot left dot parent is t; otherwise,
we just recursively insert to our left.
So, if you do have a left we recursively insert,
if we do not have a left then we create a
node with v, this is the actually insert operation
and we make it point to us through its parent.
Likewise, if we do want to go right and there
is no right, we insert it to the right and
we make it point to ourselves through it is
parent; otherwise, we recursively insert to
the right, so is the insert to the very straight
forward function.
So, how do we delete a node, so with delete
says, but we given a value v which we find
v in the tree, you must delete the node containing.
So, the basic case that is very simple to
handle is one the node is a leaf node, because
then we can just delete it and then it is
just falls of the tree at the bottom.
So, for instants if you want to delete 65,
then we will search for 65 find it by the
usual mechanism of following the left and
right paths.
And then since it is a leaf node we can just
remove this node from the tree and nothing
happens, it remains valid search.
Now, sometimes a deleted node might have only
one child, for instance supposing we delete
74.
So, we come down to 74, now we want to delete
this node, but it has the right child, but
now what we can do, you can promote this child,
so we can just kind of pretend that this link
goes directly through this to 91.
So, you just eliminate that node in between
and the directly connect 52 to the successor
of the node that is going to be delete.
So, if there is only one child in this no
problem, now what if the child delete, child
is 2 deleted node as 2 children.
So, supposing you want a delete 37 that is
this one.
So, we identify 37 now 37 must go to but we
cannot arbitrarily re structure the tree,
because we will have 2 children and we do
not know what to do with it.
So, now one strategy that works is to make
a hole there to remove the 37 and replace
it by either it is predecessor or successive.
So, supposing we identify it is predecessor
with predecessor remember will be the biggest
node a maximum in it is left sub trees.
So, here it will be 28, so what we will do
is, we will copy the 28 to this node which
is to be deleted.
So, 37 the node is not be deleted, it is value
has been replace by 28, now why is the valid
valid, because we want to preserve the shorted
thing.
So, if we have some list of shorted values
and I delete something here, then what happens
is that everything is to the right of the
predecessor.
So, I have basically move the predecessor
to this point, where preserve the order between
these elements in the sorted order.
So, moving the predecessor here I guaranty
there anything that is to their height, remains
bigger then this node and everything to the
left remains smaller then this node, because
that was the biggest values.
Now of course, I have two copies at 28, so
I am was remove that 28, so then I will focus
on the left sub tree and I delete this predecessor
value.
But, the good thing of at the predecessor
value is that is the right most valued, right
most value means either it is a leaf or it
has only left child.
So, we have back in the simpler case one of
these two cases.
So, we can just delete the predecessor of
the using one of these two cases, either it
is going to be a leaf it is just falls off
or I am going to promote this 21.
So, in this case the 21 will get promoted,
so deleting in general consist of moving the
predecessor to the current value and then
deleting the predecessor in the left sub tree.
So, it is a long piece of code, because we
have been many cases, so first of all you
with empty tree we do not nothing to we cannot
delete.
If form the other hand that value at the current
node is not v, so if it is strictly less than,
then it there is something to the left we
delete from there, if it is strictly greater
then at there is something to the right we
delete from there, so these are the two recursive
cases.
So, if it is not strictly less than and not
strictly greater then in must be equal and
we have to do some real deletes.
So, now we have this three cases.
So, the first case actually breaks up in two
cases, if it is a leaf it could be a leaf
because it is the root, the root and which
is only one node.
So, we will treat that slightly differently,
so we will say that if it has no parent that
is it is the root, then deleting the value
actually makes it tree empty.
So, we just a reset t to be the empty tree
nil and the return.
If on the other hand, it is a leaf node it
has no children, then what we do is we try
to delete it by just setting the parents value
to be nil.
So, supposing I come here and this my leaf
node and I want to delete this, then I look
up and then I basically set the right pointer
of this to be nil, which is essentially kills
of this link and says that there is no right
pointers.
So, if the current node is the left child
of it is parent as said the left child with
the parent to nil.
Otherwise, said the right child with the parent
to nil, so this of course, create some garbage
because this node is now an accessible, in
accessible from the tree.
But, we assume that this should be recovered
and we do not at you worry about it, if you
are doing this in a language likes see, then
you have to be very careful to this store
this back to the free space.
But, in a other language which have garbage
collection, this will they automatically be
restored and garbage collection takes a over,
but the point is that we have just simply
removing it by resetting are parents point
at be there, so this is the leaf case.
So, having consider into the leaf case, now
let us consider the case if I will delete
a node with a only one child.
So, the first case we will look at this, when
we have trying to delete a node which has
only a left sub tree.
So, left is not nil, right is nil, so what
we do first of all is we look at this immediate
left successor.
So, this has a parent somewhere about it,
so if first make this left child point directly
to the parent.
So, t dot left dot parent is t dot parent,
then we look up and we decided whether this
is the left parent or left child or a right
child which parent.
So, supposing the node we have is sitting
to the left of its parent, if t dot parent
are left is t, then what we do is we make
this point directly.
Now, on the other hand if it was not like
this, but it was the other way, so this happened
to be a right child of which parent, then
the right child should not point directly,
the right child of the parent is now my left
child.
So, this the way to splices out or remove
this thing and promote the child they only
child are we do a symmetrical thing if it
is only the right child.
So, we first take the right child and then
we reset its parent to be your own parent
and there after that depending on the case,
we either make at this point like this, at
this point like this.
So, either t dot parent of left is t dot right,
t dot parent of right is t dot left.
So, if I have only one child we just remove
the node if effectively from the tree.
And finally, if we have a node with two children,
what we do is if we first compute the predecessor
at v and then we set the current nodes value
to be the predecessor value and now we know
that this value is duplicate.
So, we go the left child and deleted are remember
that when we deleted here, the left child
we have deleting what we know is the maximum
value.
So, therefore it will have either no children
it will be a leaf or it will have a single
child.
So, it will not come back to this case it
will just stop at the earlier two cases and
it will get successfully deleted.
So, there is no problem it is just calling
delete again.
So, all these operations that we have to describe
now walk down a single path.
So, therefore, the worst case complexity to
any one of these operations is the height
of the current given tree.
And if we have maintain some kind of a balance
tree like a heat we saw, then the height is
logarithmic in this sides.
So, we have n nodes the height is order log
n.
So, you will see in the next lecture how to
maintain the balance but, assuming that we
maintain in the balance we have succeeded
in what we have achieve, what it wanted to
achieve which is we wanted all these 7 operations
to be simultaneously efficient and there all
now log n time.
Because, each of them can be achieved in one
traversal up or down a path in the tree.